ZoneCheck is copyright AFNIC, 2003. It is written and maintained by
Stephane d'Alu <sdalu@nic.fr>. You can write AFNIC at <nic@nic.fr>.

The licence of ZoneCheck is disjunctive. It means you can use or
distribute (in the original form or a modified one) ZoneCheck
according to the terms in *either* (at your choice):

1) the GPL (GNU General Public License)
<URL:http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>. To summary (a lot!), it
means you can use ZoneCheck freely, you can have the source code, you
can distribute it freely (even after modifications) BUT you cannot
deny these freedoms to the people who receive it: for instance, you
must provide them with the source code.

2) or the following terms (which are very close from the X11/MIT
licence): Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person
obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files
(the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction,
including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge,
publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software,
and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so,
subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE
LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION
OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

--------------

Patch submitters are therefore informed that, for the patches to be
included, you must agree on both licences.

------------

References that you may find interesting:

http://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html
http://sourceforge.net/docman/display_doc.php?docid=778&group_id=1

$Id$

